The argumentative apparatus of bureaucracy saw a process of **temporalisation** in the period after 1974, and, to a small extend, in the Wilson years. Collocation analysis show steep rises in collocation scores (dice) between the word bureaucracy and "grow", "growth", "increase" and "create". The former two terms also collocated frequently with "bureaucracy" in the years between 1967 and 1972.

The peak in 1968 can be explained by the extensive debate titled "Growth of bureaucracy" on 1968-01-29. In these years, Lever - the Financial Secretary to the Treasury under the Wilson Government responded to the critiques on bureaucratic expansiveness that: 

	it was a hangover of the antiquated and irrelevant prejudices of a bygone age in relation to the Civil Service, which took as its basic underlying assumption that society has a vested interest in reducing the Civil Service and, further, that it is self-evident that, if the Civil Service increases in size, this is something which is, prima facie, repulsive and, prima facie, reflects discredit upon the Government concerned.
	
and, later: 

	that the growth in the Civil Service, as a long-term secular trend, is absolutely inevitable in any modern society.
	
	
The second 'boom' in the collocation plots is different. The left-leaning leader of Plaid Cymru, Gwynfor Evans argued in 1975 that: 

	The Conservative of greatest stature, the right hon. Member for Sidcup, seems to take a different view from that of the Conservative Party in Wales. He realises the evil of the great growth of bureaucracy, as he told us on television the night before last, and the need, therefore, for devolving more power to the people. He used that phrase himself. The Government take this attitude, too.
	
and Wilson himself arguing in 1975 (uk.proc.d.1975-11-19.6.1.49.14):

	My one criticism—and not of the party opposite in what I am about to say—is that in recent years in particular there has been in some areas of local government a big increase in the ratio between chiefs and Indians—or, perhaps better, between teeth and tail—between those engaged in administration and those at the sharp end providing help for those in need, and so on. This ratio, the administrative overload, in the words of a famous Resolution of this House of 1780, has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished. But the biggest single factor in this wide area of our national life, extending from local government to water supplies and the Health Service—I say this to anyone who talks about the increase in public expenditure—is in the drastically misconceived policies which led to the re-organisation carried through in local government—duplication, double banking, a vastly increased bureaucracy, super-chiefs taken on to supervise existing chiefs, and divided responsibility. Let those whose single prescription for handling our nation's problems lie in vague proscription of public expenditure examine their own record, their own responsibility, their own conscience—on water, on the Health Service and on local government.