Political debate in the years of the Conservative Heath government was marked by the extensive discussion of several issues closely related to and involved with arguments pertaining to bureaucracy. First, the accession to the European Community provoked a heightened topicality of the concept of bureaucracy. In January 1972, the Conservative launched the European Communities Act. In February 1972 intense debate followed during the Second Reading. Three years later, the referendum on membership, pledged by the Labour Party in its October 1974 Manifesto provoked new debates. 

The second issue was devolution or 'Home Rule"': the delegation of administrative and legislative powers to subcentralised levels, most relevant to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. With nationalist tensions rising in the late 1960s devolution became a more pressing political issue, and both parties revisited their long-standing positions on the topic. In 1968 a Royal Commission was established that investigated the potential for legislative devolution. A report was published in 1973 and lead to fierce debates in the Commons. Especially the Conservatives, officially named the Conservative and Unionist Party were not eager to devolve \cite{ezzamelAccountingPoliticsDevolution2008}. During the tumultuous year 1974 the Scottish National Party won eleven seats (in the October election) and the devolution debate became even more pressing. In reaction, the newly instated Labour government published a White Paper in 1975 with further plans for devolution. Many Labour MPs, however, were fiercely against it.

The debates on the European accession and the issue of devolution produced a plethora of bureaucratic arguments. In relation to Europe, the size and unaccountability of the Brussels bureaucracy was often stressed. In the case of devolution, the threat to local government and individual freedom was often mentioned. Questions of cost efficiency appeared in both contexts. 

Both topics not only lead to an increased use of the concepts and its related arguments, but also changed the argumentative apparatus in general. First, the debates further politicized the concept of bureaucracy. Using sentiment lexicons, the average polarity of a debate can be measured, showing this politicised nature of mostly the EEC accession debate. 

Besides the politicization, the debates also accelerated the integration of different arguments and different contexts. The debate on the European Union was frequently linked to devolution with the help of arguments of extra layers of bureaucracy. As early as 1971 Frank Ashcroft Judd argued that "at a time when so many politicians on all sides express their concern about the growth of impersonal and remote bureaucracy in Britain and the need for effective devolution and finding new ways of democratic participation, it is odd that we should be so ready to move into an international group which has a still more powerful bureaucracy over which it will be even more difficult to exercise control". (Judd, 1971-01-20)


