During the years in which the Conservatives developed more substantive critiques on bureaucracy, Labour MPs and thinkers gradually came to embrace parts of the Conservative "diagnosis". Writing in a letter to the Conservative *Times*, Kenneth Younger, retired "Gaitskellite" Labour MP, wrote in response to one of the CPC pamphlets that "David Howell's pamphlet on a Tory future is throught-provoking and is fasionable in its insistence that public spending is ecessive, bureaucracy inflated and Keynesianism explode" (Times, Feb. 9, 1976). 

On the left flank of the Labour party, attacks were launched against the unaccountable "mandarins". Michael Williams notes the "common ground among critics of the civil service on the right of the Conservative Party and on the left of the Labour Party". Brian Sedgemore, for example, served on the House of Common's Expenditure Committee and its inquiry into the civil service in 1976-1977. Sedgemore launched polemic attacks against the unaccountable power held by the civil service. 

Williams also observes how centre Labour figures lost faith in the civil service. The socialist heralding of the bureaucracy as crucial in realising socialist goals was abandoned. Popular books like Leslie Chapman's *Your Disobedient Servant* contributed to this overall distrust of the civil service. Furthermore, former Labour members eagerly spoke out against the immense extension of bureaucracy planned by Labour.

The year 1978 added another dimension to the general anti-bureaucratic atmosphere. Controversies over the government's White Paper on open government, but its refusal to translate this in legislation, led to cross-party discontent with "Whitehall men who prefer the cloak of secrecy" (WhitehallMenWho1978).


williamsWhitehallManagerialRevolution2000
DemocracyFightWhitehall1977
WhyYouShould1977