The first year of the new Labour government, 1975, was marked not only by the publication of King's *overload thesis*, but also by the rising prominence of Conservative commentary on economic and administrative policy. The mid-1970s saw the expansion of an "archipelago of think tanks", consisting of for example the Institute for Economic Affairs and the Centre for Policy Studies, established by Thatcher and her mentor Keith Joseph "to do in political terms for the free market what the IEA had so successfully done in the wider intellectual community" (Cockett, 1994, 236). The publications by these institutions quickly adopted King's diagnosis, as visible in Alistair Burnett's publication "Is Britain Governable?", that was published in the same year as the institute's establishment.

Outside the think tank's effort to "think the unthinkable", the Conservative party also increasingly reverted to more ideological reflections on their course, forced by the electoral defeat and the image of Edward Heath's frequent "U-turns". Two publications shed light on this Conservative return to ideological contemplation: the edited volume *The Conservative Opportunity* (1976) and *The Dilemma of Democracy* (1978), authored by Quintin Hogg, Lord Chancellor during the Heath government, and later during the Thatcher administration. 

With regard to bureaucracy, the years of the Wilson and Callaghan government saw the development of a relatively cohesive Conservative critique on socialist bureaucracy. In their attacks on the Labour Party, both Blake and Hogg saw bureaucracy as one of the core problems of a centralised bureaucracy. Blake observes that existing criticisms of economic policy and the trade union dominance "have been enhanced by - and closely connected with - a surge of feeling against 'bureaucracy' ". Hogg, or Lord Hailsam, argues that "At the heart of the elective dictatorship resides the government machine, the bureaucracy, the Civil Service". Striking about the "diagnosis" is the moral dimension that is provided along with the ideological rebuttal of socialism. Similar to Thatcher, bureaucracy was framed as part of the moral crisis of the 1970s. Bureaucracy was the aesthetic materialisation of uniformity, greyness, hierarchy and domination (Grimley in Making Thatcher's Britain). Hogg argued that "[a]ll administration develops into bureaucracy. Human relations are depersonalized and men begin to think of themselves as numbers" (Hailsam, 159).

The Conservatives also twisted the socialist expectation of a growing bureaucracy on its head. Instead of embracing the expansion of bureaucracy as it was part of a beneficiary expansion of government responsiblities, Conservatives argued that "[i]t was tolerable, even beneficial, in former days precisely because central government controlled so small a portion of our lives. Now that in almost every field of activity, government intrudes, it needs to be broken down into smaller units with divided power" (Hailsam, 165). The *Times* reported in April 1978 that the attitude of "individualism crossed with populism" would likely be "in tune with much of the rather vague but widespread public resentment of bureaucracy and excessive government" (ConservativeAgenda1978).