## Bureaucracy in Postwar British Political Thought

Conservative thought on the state and bureaucracy was relatively consistent during the period under scrutiny. Attacks on "red tape" and bureaucracy as the effect of legislation discussed in the Commons frequently appear throughout the 1930s and 1940s and continued into the 1950s and 1960s. The Attlee government only accelerated the Conservative focus on bureaucratic interference. The 1951 Conservative Manifesto stated that under Conservative government " 'the productive energies of the nation from the"trammels" of overbearing state control and bureaucratic management'' britainRightRoadBritain1949 . Six years earlier, Conservatives lost the 1945 election despite Churchill's passionate warnings against unprecedented bureaucratization and his call to "set the people free'' zweiniger-bargielowskaRationingAusterityConservative1994 . This rhetoric marked the 1950s and early 1960s despite the "Butskellite consensus'': the Conservative embrace of the welfare state. Part of the explanation for the Conservative victory in 1959 is their framing of political differences in terms of (Conservative) individual freedom and (Socialist) state domination. Here, the spectre of the Stalinist Soviet Union played an important role. Word embedding models demonstrate the centrality of terms such as "dictatorship'', "communism'' and "tyranny'' in the semantic field of "bureaucracy'' in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Surprisingly, the Soviet "apparatchik'' also fuelled anti-bureaucratic sentiments in socialist circles. It was "bureaucracy'' that was held responsible for the totalitarianism of the Soviet system. In a 1958 edition of The New Reasoner - the predecessor of the New Left Review - , John Rex observes how "in current left-wing parlance \[bureaucracy\] has become the key excuse-word for explaining how Russia got Stalinized'' rexLabourBureaucracy1958 .

Socialist thought on bureaucracy was more complex than the classical liberalism of laissez-faire that informed Conservative stances on the size of the civil service. In general, the civil service was seen as vital in realising socialist goals. Especially as the Labour Party assimilated in the "Westminster model'' during the Interbellum, Whitehall was seen as the key to the execution of nationalisation. However, several strands of thinking complicate the assumed socialist embrace of bureaucracy. Kevin Theakston identifies four main strands of thinking in the long-term Labour Party attitudes toward bureaucracy \\citeyear{theakstonLabourPartyWhitehall1992 . First, Labour thinkers feared civil service obstruction. Harold Laski, chairman of the Party for a brief period after the war, warned against civil service sabotage by conservative mandarins as early as the 1930s. This suspicion of the civil service was a broader felt phenomenon in the 1930s and 1940s. In The Managerial Revolution (1941) James Burnham, who became a prominent conservative after the war, presented his theory of managerialism. He identified the rise of managers as a common trait in the capitalist, communist and fascist systems of his time. Managerialism, according to Burnham, succeeded entrepreneurial capitalism, as managers took a hold over the means of production. Burnham warned against the danger of the erosion of national sovereignty and the detached consumption-driven mindset of the managers. His arguments later featured in many conservative critiques of welfare state paternalism.

Besides the fears for conservative mandarins, socialist statism was also challenged by other socialist traditions. Late nineteenth-century anarcho-socialist feared the "new class'', warning that "by pretending to represent working-class interests, intellectuals sought to establish themselves as a new dominant class after the fall of capitalism and the propertied bourgeoisie" \\cite\[pp. vii\]{kingTheoriesNewClass . Around the First World War, revisionist argued against a sudden socialist revolution, partially because of the dangers of suffocating centralism. In the twenties, "guild socialism'' developed similar ideas to preserve democratic procedures and industrial democracy through worker participation in government bendix1950socialism .

Aside from the fundamental questions about bureaucratic governments as non-democratic, the Labour Party, especially once assimilated in the Westminster system, also harbored intellectual traditions dealing with the form and quality of bureaucracy as it was. Related to the first issue of conservative bureaucrats was the question of Whitehall's class composition. Until late in the twentieth century, ministries and departments were mostly populated with Oxbridge graduates, and while social mobility provided lower classes with new educational opportunities. The question of which type of expertise was necessary also closely related to the issue of class composition. The "Technocratic Moment" of the mid-1950s

The main tradition that supplied the Labour party with policy position on the Civil Service was the Fabianism. The Fabian Society}, established in 1884, was one of the groups the founded the later Labour Party and had always remained officially related to it. The Fabians, named after Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus whose "Fabian strategy'' of gradual attrition resulted in victory against the Carthages, advocated a gradual transition to socialism. They traditionally focused on institutional themes and published influential tracts. The Fabian Society hosted many of the anti-statist suspicion of bureaucracy. Richard Crossman's Socialism and the New Despotism (1956) identified the dangers of bureaucracy and red tape. Although Crossman was a "Bevanite'' (a left-winger, opposed to the right-wing "Gaitskellites'') he repudiated the policies of the Attlee government, policies that had resulted in nothing more than a "managerial society'' with a bureaucracy unaccountable to both workers and parliament (p1.).

In the sixties, the Fabians advocated not so much against communist-style bureaucracy, as in favour of a more accountable and efficient one. In the Fabian Tract The Administrators (1964), the authors set the tone for the Wilson reform agenda, pointing at the isolation of government, the dominance of generalists, its closed hierarchy and its lack of accountability AdministratorsReformCivil .

## The Argumentative Apparatus

Based on the overview of postwar thought on bureaucracy and the distant reading of parliamentary proceedings, a typology of arguments pertaining to bureaucracy can be made.