## Introduction

In 1975, the year that Margaret Thatcher won the Conservative leadership election, Anthony King, then a political scientist at the University of Essex, published a paper titled *Overload: Problems of Governing in the 1970s* #kingOverloadProblemsGoverning1975 . King argued that governing had become nearly impossible. The pressure of elections forced governments to abandon long-term thinking. To survive, governments had no other option than to concede to electoral and trade union demands, hereby effectively functioning as an "unlimited insurance company". Consequently, King argued, the public expenditure and the public sector had expanded dramatically, a process that evolved against the backdrop of the post-1973 economy of stagflation and rising unemployment. Combined with technological innovation and administrative incompetence this had produced a vicious circle of ungovernability and "overload". King captured this "overload thesis" in the metaphor of Goethe's *Zauberlehrling*. After giving away control to an enchanted broomstick, the sorcerer's apprentice cannot go back. The waters rise. There is nothing to be done, except for waiting for the sorcerer to return.

"Overload" and the diagnosis of "ungovernability" became crucial elements in the paradigm shift that took place in the late 1970s. In this period, keynesian recipes to crisis and the paradigm of socialist planning crumbled. During the Wilson and Callaghan government, a period of "Knightean uncertainty" appeared #blythGreatTransformationsEconomic2002 . The overload thesis can be seen as the diagnosis that produced such uncertainty. It pointed at the problems of big government, overspending and electoral pressures, hereby paving the sorcerer's return in the form of Margaret Thatcher's victory in 1979. 

Current literature emphasizes the constructed nature of the various 'crises' that befell the 1970s Labour governments and the Keynesian policy paradigm. In his seminal article on the topic Colin Hay, for example, shows how the 'Winter of Discontent' - the winter of 1978/79 that saw widespread strikes and power outages - was both a political reality as a medial construct effectively exploited by Conservative strategists and ideologues #hayNarratingCrisisDiscursive1996 #hayRethinkingCrisisNarratives1995 . Hay's premise can be recognized in the field of constructivist institutionalism, that sees periods of economic crisis such as the late 1970s as times of 'Knightean uncertainty', when actors are not only uncertain about the solutions to crisis, but also about their interests in it blythGreatTransformationsEconomic2002,hay2004ideas .

Consequentially, the intellectual history of the Conservative victory in 1979 is often written as the history of a "revolution" or "moment". A series of simmering crises culminated in the "winter of discontent'' and the sudden defeat of the Callaghan government. A substantial number of contributions have question this temporality of the neoliberal revolt hiltonNewTimesRevisited2017 . Most of them focus on the existence of neoliberal ideas long before Thatcher and the policy proposal flowing from think tanks such as the Atlas Institute and the Institute for Economic Affairs jacksonCurrentsNeoLiberalismBritish2016 . The chronology of the construction of political crisis, however, is still focussed on the late 1970s. This perspective suffers from two shortcomings. First, its temporality of "moments'' leaves no room for longer-term ideational change. Second, it renders the agency the actors associated with the "old'' ideas impossible. The advocates of the crumbling Keynesian paradigm can only stand by and watch how media discursively construct crisis and Conservative ideas make use of the uncertainty. Lastly, the approach also risks indirectly perpetuating the story told by the "neoliberals'' themselves. By presenting the years 1978-79 as a "Conservative Opportunity'', one risks narrating the same story necessity as the Conservatives themselves did.

This paper complements the literature on the New Right "moment" in 1978-79 by showing how another crisis was discursively constructed: the crisis of bureaucracy. This crisis concerned the argument(s) that the processes of nationalisation, centralisation and trade union concessions gave rise to overtly large, costly, inefficient and unaccountable bureaucracy. Excessive bureaucracy was one of the demons that haunted an overloaded government. However, the issue of bureaucracy is noteworthy for two reasons. First, ideas about maladministration, unaccountable bureaucrats and an costly civil service are by no means tied to the topic of overload or the mid-1970s. Second, ideas about the state and the civil service play a marginal role in the historiography of the neoliberal turn. They are generally assumed to be secondary to economic ideas about planning. 

## Problem Statement and Question

Thus a puzzle appears: how do ideas about the shape and character of bureaucracy relate to the intellectual shift in the late 1970s "overload thesis'' in particular if these ideas are not unique to the moment of (discursively constructed) crisis? By studying arguments pertaining to bureaucracy, this paper investigates the 'discursive construction of crisis' in order to better understand the long(er)-term history of such a construction.

## Approach and Method

This paper studies the construction of bureaucratic crisis by conceptualizing an argumentative apparatus pertaining to bureaucracy. The paper argues that the "overload thesis'' was embedded in argumentative changes that long predated the mid-seventies. These changes were rooted in several contextual factors, such as the Labour emphasis on "efficiency'' and "participation'' in respectively the late sixties and early seventies and the debates on the EEC accession, the Local Government Act and devolution in the early seventies.

The argumenative changes that are discussed in this paper include:
   - a substantialization of arguments: bureaucracy is less about "distant" communism and less used in a figurative sense. Instead, it becomes something tangible, related to concrete problems in the administration
   - a temporalisation of arguments and the increasing: bureaucracy becomes entangled in a temporal frame of "unstoppable growth", but also in a temporal narrative of the "keynesian" 1970s and the need for something else in the next decade.
   - an interrelatedness of arguments: arguments about cost, efficiency, size and accountability are increasingly combined in a comprehensive critique of overloaded government.

The paper combines a close reading of parliamentary proceedings, media sources and documents produced by party-affiliated persons and institutions (see next subsection) with a quantitative analysis of the parliamentary proceedings:

- frequency measures (rel. frequencies through time, collocations measures) 

- distributional models (word2vec, semantic fields)

- text classification (argument classifier)

## Data

The paper utilizes three types of data. It concentrates on parliamentary proceedings as a way to quantitatively detect changes in the use of arguments. Second, it uses publications by important party institutions, such as the Fabian Society, the Institute for Economic Affairs and the Conservative Political Centre. 

T

## Argumentative Alignment

### I - Communism, Grievances and Anti-Bureaucratic Rhetoric (1957-1964)

In the years of the Conservative MacMillan and Douglas-Home governments, the different types of arguments identified earlier all surfaced in parliamentary debates. Bureaucracy was seen as costly, irrational, inefficient, overly powerful and unaccountable. However, three features mark the use of the concept in the period between 1957 and 1964: the extent to which bureaucracy was linked to Soviet socialism by Conservative actors; the overall use of the concept as a rhetorical device in arguments not targeted at bureaucracy itself and the focus on a bureaucratic "mentality" as the object of polemic. 

First, the majority of speeches using the concept of "bureaucracy" were not discussing the concept itself. This "acentrality'' of the concept resulted in the use of bureaucracy as a form of figurative speech, or the use of the concept in arguments that were not targeted at bureaucracy itself. Indicative is also the ratio between the frequencies of "bureaucracy'' and "bureaucratic''. Before the mid-1960s, this ratio was moving around 1, meaning that the noun and the adjective had comparable frequencies. Later, the ratio increases, meaning that bureaucracy was increasingly used when compared to "bureaucratic''.

IMAGE: ADJECTIVE-NOUN RATIO

When bureaucracy itself was the subject of debate, it were mostly Conservative MPs that fulminated against the bureaucratic consequences of socialist policies. Heathcoat Amory, Conservative MP and Chancellor of the Exchequer, argued in a 1959 speech that the supreme issue in the next election would be "a choice between freedom and opportunity for the individual and the all-pervading power of a bureaucratic state'' #BureaucracyFreedom1959 . For the Conservatives, bureaucracy was the simple byproduct of socialism, a sentiment only reinforced by the Cold War tensions and not restricted to Conservatives alone. Labour critiques on the danger of Soviet-inspired bureaucratic totalitarianism were part of broader debates in socialist circles in the late 1950s. They were an integral part of the clashes between revisionists (Gaitskellites, named after the Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell) and orthodox socialists ("Bevanites"). The latter collective was accused by the centrist segment of the party of supporting a bureaucratic dictatorship. However, the concept of bureaucracy was also used by the left wing factions of the party as a way to critique the corrupting managerial class that existed under capitalism. In the late 1950s a third intellectual collective formed that also took bureaucracy as its nemesis. With the Soviet Union generally discredited after the suppression of the 1956 Hungarian uprising scholars such as Stuart Hall, Raphael Samuel and Charles Taylor started formulating ideas that would later become part of the "New Left''. Based on amongst other C. Wright Mills' *Power Elite* (1956) they formulated more substantive critiques of bureaucratic power, technocracy and "complex power structure of the giant oligopolies, in which wealth, power, status and control are interchangeable and interlinked" #davisArguingAffluenceNew2012, #gearyBecomingInternationalAgain2008 . #gearyBecomingInternationalAgain2008 . The concept of a "power elite'' - as well as other theories on bureaucratization and managerialism - was used to draw the attention to the de facto capitalist power of government bureaucrats and the bureaucratic power of capitalist corporations. As such, bureaucracy became a more central concept in attacks on both senseless planning and capitalist big business #foksSociologicalImaginationBritish2018. The emphasis of bureaucracy as a systemic feature of communism, or bureaucracy as a harmful effect of capitalism is reflected in the central terms as aggregated by a language model trained on the period 1958-1961. Terms referring to the Soviet spectre, such as "dictatorship" and "communism" appear as central in the semantic field around bureaucracy.

Besides these ideology-driven suspicions of bureaucratic power, day-to-day parliamentary rhetoric also featured anti-bureaucratic arguments. With Labour in opposition until 1964, it were Labour MPs that most frequently employed these arguments. What marked complaints about bureaucracy in the late 1950s and early 1960s is the emphasis on arguments pertaining to irrationality and inefficiency. Labour MPs, but also Conservative members,  frequently lamented a bureaucratic "mentality": slow, inefficient administrative "bumbledom", captured in idioms such as "formfilling", "red tape", "paperwork" and phrases such as "bureaucracy gone mad" and "bureaucracy gone riot". These allegations mostly concerned the behavior of specific institutions and the experiences of constituents passed on by the MPs. Alternatively, this image of bureaucratic "bogge" was invoked when discussing the potential effects of legislation. Proposals were rejected because they would lead to "irresponsible State bureaucracy" (MacColl, Labour, 1958-12-01) or "short-sighted, reactionary, and restrictive bureaucracy" (Noel-Baker, Labour, 1961-11-15). This everyday use of the concept as a way to attack the injustices caused by petty bureaucrats shows from terms such as "bribery", "corruption" and "disrepute". Furthermore, an aggregation of adjectives referring to "bureaucracy" also shows the importance of clusters consisting of "unnecessary", "excessive", "petty" and "monstrous". 

IMAGE: MOST CENTRAL TERMS

IMAGE: SEMANTIC FIELD

IMAGE: ADJECTIVES

### II - Efficiency and Temporalisation 1964-1970

In 1964 Harold Wilson won the election after campaign rhetoric focused on modernisation, reform and harnessing the "white heat of technological revolution" to bring Britain up to speed. His revolution also entailed a different approach to government and the civil service focused on "efficiency" and "modernisation". Wilson was a "Centre Left Technocrat", a collective that overlapped to a large extent with the Fabian Society. In the 1964 tract *The Administrators* (1964) this movement of pragmatist socialists had set an agenda for civil service reform, including the shift to specialist bureaucrats (instead of the Oxbridge-schooled humanists), a more open government and more accountability. Labour's agenda of efficiency was purely pragmatic. It differed from the earlier planning adepts, that put forward planning's ethical dimension. Instead, planning was meant to ensure growth and productivity #favrettoWilsonismReconsideredLabour2000. Besides these political goals, the insistence on bureaucratic efficiency and effective statecraft also stemmed from more complex factors. David Edgerton notes how since the ensuing of the "two cultures" debate in 1956, the British civil service was increasingly accused of being composed of uninformed generalists. This also involved a generational conflict, since a new educated "technocratic" middle-class, also present in the Fabian Society, rose to power edgertonSnowAntiHistorianBritish2005.

Historians consider the practical outcomes of Wilson's agenda rather marginal. Perhaps the most influential outcome was the Fulton Report, published in 1968 after a two-year long enquiry into the functioning of the civil service. The report proposed a host of reforms, of which little were realised. Nevertheless, the late 1960s saw some institutional reconfigurations, as well as the appearance of explicit discussions about the nature and functioning of bureaucracy. 

The institutional effects of Wilson's agenda and the Fulton Committee are considered to be marginal. The argumentative apparatus, however, changed during the years of Labour government. A first observation is the plain rise in frequency of the word "bureaucracy". Especially Conservatives uttered the term more frequently, something that is not surprising given their natural antipathy towards socialism and the associated high level of bureaucracy. However, Conservatives used the term more than Labour had done during their time in opposition. Furthermore, Labour itself also used the term more and more after 1968. 

Several patterns appear from the visualisations of the different argument types and their diachronic development. Labour practically stopped using anti-bureaucratic arguments pertaining to the size of bureaucracy and its irrational nature. This likely stems from their role as government party, a role that made the chance of complaints about overly big or extremely irrational bureaucracy smaller. Surprisingly, argument relating to accountability also decrease in Labour discourse, although after 1968 - the year of the Fulton Report - this type increases in frequency. With regard to the Conservatives, it is striking how arguments pertaining to efficiency are shared among the parties. 

Besides the dynamics *within* the argumentative apparatus, there also appears a more general form of change: a **temporalisation** of the arguments. In speeches by both Labour and Conservative MPs, there is a growing sense of continuous expansion. In other words, in the late 1960s, bureaucracy is increasingly seen as in the process of expansion. In 1968, this issue is discussed explicitly when Geoffrey Rippon, who would later compose the EEC accession bill, filed a motion titled 'the growth of bureaucracy' on the 29th of January 1968. The motion started as follows:

>  I beg to move, That this House deplores the continued growth of bureaucracy and the failure of Her Majesty's Government to announce in their Statement on Public Expenditure, Command Paper No. 3515, clear proposals to streamline the machinery of Government and so reduce the numbers employed in the public service. The most urgent task facing Parliament today is to curb the power of central Government and close the ever-widening gap between Whitehall and our constituents. In the last three years, we have seen an apparently uncontrollable growth in the numbers of public servants. Whereas between 1951 and 1964 the number of non-industrial civil servants, excluding the Post Office, fell by 11,000, in the three years between October, 1964, and October, 1967, the numbers rose by no fewer than 54,000. This is an increase in the hard core of administrative bureaucracy and represents a rise of about 13 per cent (Rippon, 29-01-1968)

The motion, as well as the extensive debate that ensued, is an early example of a more explicit and conscious Conservative attack on bureaucracy that involved multiple types of anti-bureaucratic arguments. Rippon mentions both the "evils'' of inflexibility and arbitrariness as well as the cost and centralisation. 

Labour MPs reacted scornfully and accussed Rippon of questioning the integrity of the civil service. Harold Lever, Financial Secretary to the Treasury, gave a more substantive answer. The growth in the Civil Service, according to Lever, "is absolutely inevitable in any modern society". Bureaucracy grows because of the increase in white-collar labour, the greater demand put on services by virtue of a more affluent society and (only) thirdly, the responsibility of government in the national economic effort which put a greater demand on government. Lever concluded by saying that "[u]nless the Tory Party wishes to make itself the last repository of out-of-date and irrelevant prejudice it might as well admit that, if we envisage a growing and modernising society, it automatically follows that there must be an increase in the public services as well as in private service industries. Any other view is as stupid as it is doctrinaire" (Lever, 29-01-1968).

What this debate shows is the addition of a temporal frame to the argumentative apparatus. The problem was not only the size and cost of bureaucracy, but the historical fact that bureaucracy had grown and the expectation that it would continue to do so in the future. Signs of this process of temporalisation also appear from collocation analysis. Words such as "swollen'', "enormous'' and "growth'' each peak in the Wilson years. As seen in the debate in 1968, Labour responded to the allegations of bureaucracy growing out of control by pointing at the growth of bureaucracy as both a natural phenomenon in advanced industrial societies and the consequence of an interventionist state. However, they also adopted the temporality of growth from time to time by arguing that it was actually the Conservative government before 1964 that was responsible for the growth.

IMAGE: ARGUMENT SHARES PER PARTY
IMAGE: SEMANTIC FIELD

### III - Heath, Europe and Increasing Topicality 1970 - 1974/75

#### Europe and Devolution
Political debate in the years of the Conservative Heath government was marked by the extensive discussion of several issues closely related to and involved with arguments pertaining to bureaucracy. First, the accession to the European Community provoked a heightened topicality of the concept of bureaucracy. In January 1972, the Conservative launched the European Communities Act. In February 1972 intense debate followed during the Second Reading. Three years later, the referendum on membership, pledged by the Labour Party in its October 1974 Manifesto provoked new debates. 

The second issue was devolution or 'Home Rule"': the delegation of administrative and legislative powers to subcentral levels, most relevant to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland #mitchellDevolutionUK2013. With nationalist tensions rising in the late 1960s devolution became a more pressing political issue, and both parties revisited their long-standing positions on the topic. In 1968 a Royal Commission was established that investigated the potential for legislative devolution. A report was published in 1973 and lead to fierce debates in the Commons. Especially the Conservative Party, officially named the Conservative and Unionist Party, was not eager to devolve #ezzamelAccountingPoliticsDevolution2008 . During the tumultuous year 1974 the Scottish National Party won eleven seats (in the October election) and the devolution debate became even more pressing. In reaction, the newly instated Labour government published a White Paper in 1975 with further plans for devolution. Many Labour MPs, however, were fiercely against it.

The debates on the European accession and the issue of devolution produced a plethora of bureaucratic arguments. The EEC and "Brussels" was consistently referred to by all sides as a "bureaucracy". Most frequent were arguments related to accountability, voiced mostly by Labour MPs. In the case of devolution, the threat to local government and individual freedom was often mentioned. Questions of cost efficiency appeared in both contexts.  Both topics not only lead to an increased use of the concepts and its related arguments, but also changed the argumentative apparatus in multiple ways. First, the debates further ***politicised*** the concept of bureaucracy. That is, because of devolution and the membership issue, the concept of bureaucracy was drawn into highly politicised debates. Using sentiment lexicons, the average polarity of a debate can be measured, showing this politicised nature of mostly the EEC accession debate. Besides the politicization, the debates also accelerated the integration of different arguments and different contexts. Constellations of several different argument types became more familiar. Devolution and the EEC were even discussed together under the umbrella of bureaucracy. The Labour MP Frank Ashcroft Judd argued in 1971 that "at a time when so many politicians on all sides express their concern about the growth of impersonal and remote bureaucracy in Britain and the need for effective devolution and finding new ways of democratic participation, it is odd that we should be so ready to move into an international group which has a still more powerful bureaucracy over which it will be even more difficult to exercise control" (Judd, 1971-01-20).

IMAGE: PRODUCTIVITY

Stances towards bureaucracy also changed as the result of ideological shifts in the Labour Party. The New Left, that launched early attacks on bureaucratic institutions in the early 1960s, had become an important voice in the party and in Europe in general. The solution or alternative offered by the New Left was "participation". In a Fabian Tract published in 1973, participation is seen as both an end in itself (a "means to self-realisation") as a way to achieve better decisions and to combat the power of centralised bureaucracy. Behind the ideals of participation in democracy in industry shimmers an acknowledgement of the temporal frame introduced by the Conservatives in the late 1960s. The development of participation is, according to the Tract a "necessary response to the growth in scale services". In 1968, Anthony Crosland, then part of the Wilson government, responded to the New Left by stating that "there is no substitute to clerks and computers" except for more reform and efficiency #croslandSocialismDangerousWorld1968. In the early seventies, more and more voices in Labour went beyond calls for more efficiency and developed more fundamental objections against "bureaucracy". 

### IV - Crisis, Callaghan and the Sorcerer's Return

In 1974 Wilson returned to power, albeit without a majority. For this reason, the second election of 1974 was organised in October, resulting in a slight increase in Labour seats. Only two years later, Wilson was succeeded by Jim Callaghan. One year later, the party lost its majority, leading to deal bargaining with several other parties. When a deal with the SNP collapsed in 1979, the Conservatives lead by Thatcher won the election in May 1979. The tumultuous period between 1974 and 1979 cannot be described extensively here. However, a glance at frequency plots shows how dramatically "bureaucracy" arose as a topic of discussion. With the growing topicality of bureaucracy driven by the devolution and EEC debates, the second Wilson government experienced an explosion in discussions about bureaucracy. Frequencies for the lemma skyrocket between 1973 and 1977, mostly due to Conservative employment of the term, but a rising trend is also visible in Labour discourse.

The first year of the new Labour government, 1975, was marked not only by the publication of King's *overload thesis*, but also by the rising prominence of Conservative commentary on economic and administrative policy. The mid-1970s saw the expansion of an "archipelago of think tanks", consisting of for example the Institute for Economic Affairs and the Centre for Policy Studies, established by Thatcher and her mentor Keith Joseph "to do in political terms for the free market what the IEA had so successfully done in the wider intellectual community" (Cockett, 1994, 236). The publications by these institutions quickly adopted King's diagnosis, as visible in Alistair Burnett's publication "Is Britain Governable?", that was published in the same year as the institute's establishment.

Outside the think tank's effort to "think the unthinkable", the Conservative party also increasingly reverted to more ideological reflections on their course, forced by the electoral defeat and the image of Edward Heath's frequent "U-turns". Two publications shed light on this Conservative return to ideological contemplation: the edited volume *The Conservative Opportunity* (1976) and *The Dilemma of Democracy* (1978), authored by Quintin Hogg, Lord Chancellor during the Heath government, and later during the Thatcher administration. 

With regard to bureaucracy, the years of the Wilson and Callaghan government saw the development of a relatively cohesive Conservative critique on socialist bureaucracy. In their attacks on the Labour Party, both Blake and Hogg saw bureaucracy as one of the core problems of a centralised bureaucracy. Blake observes that existing criticisms of economic policy and the trade union dominance "have been enhanced by - and closely connected with - a surge of feeling against 'bureaucracy' ". Hogg, or Lord Hailsam, argues that "At the heart of the elective dictatorship resides the government machine, the bureaucracy, the Civil Service". Striking about the "diagnosis" is the moral dimension that is provided along with the ideological rebuttal of socialism. Similar to Thatcher, bureaucracy was framed as part of the moral crisis of the 1970s. Bureaucracy was the aesthetic materialisation of uniformity, greyness, hierarchy and domination (Grimley in Making Thatcher's Britain). Hogg argued that "[a]ll administration develops into bureaucracy. Human relations are depersonalized and men begin to think of themselves as numbers" (Hailsam, 159).

- Phillip

The Conservatives also twisted the socialist expectation of a growing bureaucracy on its head. Instead of embracing the expansion of bureaucracy as it was part of a beneficiary expansion of government responsiblities, Conservatives argued that "[i]t was tolerable, even beneficial, in former days precisely because central government controlled so small a portion of our lives. Now that in almost every field of activity, government intrudes, it needs to be broken down into smaller units with divided power" (Hailsam, 165). The *Times* reported in April 1978 that the attitude of "individualism crossed with populism" would likely be "in tune with much of the rather vague but widespread public resentment of bureaucracy and excessive government" (ConservativeAgenda1978).

During the years in which the Conservatives developed more substantive critiques on bureaucracy, Labour MPs and thinkers gradually came to embrace parts of the Conservative "diagnosis". Writing in a letter to the Conservative *Times*, Kenneth Younger, retired "Gaitskellite" Labour MP, wrote in response to one of the CPC pamphlets that "David Howell's pamphlet on a Tory future is throught-provoking and is fasionable in its insistence that public spending is ecessive, bureaucracy inflated and Keynesianism explode" (Times, Feb. 9, 1976). 

On the left flank of the Labour party, attacks were launched against the unaccountable "mandarins". Michael Williams notes the "common ground among critics of the civil service on the right of the Conservative Party and on the left of the Labour Party". Brian Sedgemore, for example, served on the House of Common's Expenditure Committee and its inquiry into the civil service in 1976-1977. Sedgemore launched polemic attacks against the unaccountable power held by the civil service. 

Williams also observes how centre Labour figures lost faith in the civil service. The socialist heralding of the bureaucracy as crucial in realising socialist goals was abandoned. Popular books like Leslie Chapman's *Your Disobedient Servant* contributed to this overall distrust of the civil service. Furthermore, former Labour members eagerly spoke out against the immense extension of bureaucracy planned by Labour.

The year 1978 added another dimension to the general anti-bureaucratic atmosphere. Controversies over the government's White Paper on open government, but its refusal to translate this in legislation, led to cross-party discontent with "Whitehall men who prefer the cloak of secrecy" (WhitehallMenWho1978).

IMG: NGRAM A BUREAUCRACY

In 1978 the Conservatives conciously introduced the term "quango" into the public debate. The term "quango" ("Quasi Non-Governmental Organisation") was introduced already in 1969 in the work of Alan Pifer and found its way into the academic lexicon. Crucial in the accelerating use of the term was the book _The Quango Explosion_, published in 1978 by the Conservative Political Centre - the educational wing of the party. In the same year, a Shadow Cabinet review of the "quango's" was undertaken by Nigel Lawson, father of Nigella Lawson and to-be Treasury Minister under Thatcher.

Taking a closer look at the first "quango debates" - marked by the same ironic atmosphere as evoked by the term itself: "are little quango's called quangaroos?" - it strikes how Labour MPs immediately took over the term. The Conservative focal points - inefficiency and elite appointments - were eagerly copied by MPs such as Dennis Skinner and David Stoddart. Only later did public expenditure get involved.

Ioan Evans noted on the 19th of July of the same year: "we should tackle the problem of the quango's. As a party we must address ourselves to that problem".

IMG: QUANGO

## Conclusion

In the period between 1957 and 1979 the argumentative apparatus around the concept of "bureaucracy" changed substantively. Whereas in the 1950s bureaucracy was predominantly used in a figurative sense, or was invoked as a dangerous mirror image, the late 1960s and early 1970s presented a different constellation of arguments that focused on bureaucracy as a structural, urgent and administrative problem. Thinking about the state, the civil service and its shape and character changed in a way that enabled political actors in the late seventies to present an alternative of small government. In this way, long-term conceptual and argumentative change contributed to the, on first sight sudden, shift to New Right policies. 

Peter Jenkins, described as the "leading chronicler of the Labour governments of the 1960s and 1970s", showcases the argumentative shifts in the mid-1970s. In his daily columns in 1975 and 1976 the Königswinter journalist fulminously attacked Milton Friedman and the New Right. Yet he adhered to the same problem statements as the Chicago economists: the continuous growth of the state and the incompatibility of this growth with freedom. In another contribution, Jenkins refers to this process as the "revolution of the rising entitlements", drawn from Daniel Bell (1974).
